

 
 
 
 Unsupervised degradation learning model for endoscopic video super-resolution | Scientific Reports 
 
 



 

 

 
 
 
 





 



 
 
 
 
 
 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 






 
 
 
 

 

 

 













 


 
 
 

 





 
 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 






 
 

 
 Skip to main content 



 
 
 
 Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain
 the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
 Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
 and JavaScript. 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 View all journals 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 Log in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Content 
 Explore content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 About the journal 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sign up for alerts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RSS feed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 




 
 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 nature 
 
 
 
 scientific reports 
 
 
 
 articles 
 
 
 
 
 article 
 
 
 
 

 


 





 
 
 
 
 
 
 Unsupervised degradation learning model for endoscopic video super-resolution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 

 Published: 17 August 2026 
 

 Unsupervised degradation learning model for endoscopic video super-resolution 
 Junhao Xiong 1 , Zhengang Jiang 1 & Liangce Qi 1   

 

 
 Scientific Reports 
 ( 2026 ) Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 487 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Metrics details 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 Abstract The lack of paired high-resolution (HR) and low-resolution (LR) data poses a significant challenge for endoscopic video super-resolution. Conventional methods typically rely on predefined degradation functions (e.g., bicubic downsampling) to construct paired training data, which fail to accurately model complex degradations in real-world scenarios, resulting in a distribution gap between synthetic and real LR data, which in turn compromises the generalization capability of super-resolution models in practical applications. Although some approaches attempt to learn downsampling models to generate pseudo-paired data, in endoscopic scenarios, the degradation process is often complex and diverse, making the generated results prone to artifacts and color distortions. In addition, these methods usually process video frames independently, making it difficult to preserve temporal coherence during the degradation process. To address these issues, we propose an unsupervised degradation learning method. By leveraging unpaired clinical HR and LR video frames, the proposed method learns a degradation mapping from the HR domain to the real LR domain, thereby generating data consistent with the real LR distribution. We design a cyclic degradation learning framework to model the mapping between the HR and LR domains. By introducing a low-frequency loss and an adaptive data loss, the degradation simulation is guided to preserve structural content information while suppressing high-frequency artifacts. For video sequences, we introduce a Temporal Loss to promote motion consistency between the generated LR frames and their corresponding HR frames, which helps maintain spatiotemporal consistency during the degradation process. Experimental results demonstrate that, compared with conventional degradation modeling methods, the proposed downsampling model improves the reconstruction performance of existing video super-resolution methods on synthetic datasets and shows certain generalization potential on real clinical endoscopic videos. 
 
 


 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A Chinese Traditional Opera Video Super-Resolution Dataset Based on the “Real-world+” Degradation Fusion
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 07 February 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Design of a low-power RISC-V based intelligent endoscopy detection processor: EndoRISC-V
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 04 June 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The impact of inconsistent human annotations on AI driven clinical decision making
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 21 February 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles and news in related subjects. 
 
 
 
 
 Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 Mathematics and computing 
 
 
 
 
 Optics and photonics 
 
 
 
 
 Image Processing Techniques for Enhanced Visual Quality 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 Funding No funding was received for this study. Author information Authors and Affiliations School of Computer Science and Technology, Changchun University of Science and Technology, 7186 Satellite Road, Changchun, 130022, Jilin, China Junhao Xiong, Zhengang Jiang & Liangce Qi Authors Junhao Xiong View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Zhengang Jiang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Liangce Qi View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Zhengang Jiang . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 
 Ethical approval 
 The experimental protocol and the collection of the endoscopic videos were approved by the Academic Committee of School of Computer Science and Technology, Changchun University of Science and Technology (Approval No. 2025-051103). Furthermore, we confirm that all methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. 
 
 Additional information Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Appendices Appendix A: Ethical approval report The scanned copy of the formal ethical approval report for the endoscopic video dataset is shown in Fig. 8 . Fig. 8 Full size image The scanned copy of the formal ethical approval report for the endoscopic video dataset. Appendix B: Additional experimental details This appendix provides additional details on the clinical dataset, data splitting strategy, synthetic degradation settings, training configurations, downstream VSR training settings, and t-SNE visualization settings used in the experiments. Synthetic dataset information The information of the dataset used in “Evaluating simulated LR images” and “VSR on the synthetic dataset” sections is shown in Table  9 . Table 9 Statistics of the collected clinical endoscopic video dataset. Full size table Data splitting strategy The data splitting strategy used in the experiments is summarized in Table  10 . We divided the 200 selected HR video sequences into two non-overlapping subsets. The first subset was used as the source-domain HR data for degradation learning. The second subset was processed by different synthetic degradation settings to construct the target-domain LR data for adversarial degradation learning. In addition, 20 extra video sequences were reserved for testing. The split was performed at the video-sequence level to avoid information leakage. Table 10 Data splitting strategy used in the experiments. Full size table Synthetic degradation settings The detailed synthetic degradation settings are reported in Table  11 . This synthetic benchmark is designed to cover several typical degradation factors that may appear in endoscopic videos, including interpolation degradation, isotropic Gaussian blur, direction-dependent anisotropic blur, motion blur, and noise. All degradation settings are conducted under the \(\times 4\) upscaling factor. Table 11 Synthetic degradation settings used in the experiments. Full size table UDLM training settings The training settings of the proposed UDLM are summarized in Table  12 . During training, each input sample consists of a video clip with 10 consecutive frames. We crop HR patches of size \(256 \times 256\) from the original HR frames. Under the \(\times 4\) super-resolution setting, the corresponding LR patch size is \(64 \times 64\) . The model is first trained with the low-frequency loss during the warm-up stage. After that, the adaptive data loss is introduced, and the adaptive kernel is periodically updated according to the current behavior of the degradation generator. Table 12 Training settings of the proposed UDLM. Full size table Loss weights The loss weights used for UDLM training are listed in Table  13 . The low-frequency loss and adaptive data loss share the same data-loss weight. After the warm-up stage, the data constraint is switched from the low-frequency loss to the adaptive data loss. Table 13 Loss weights used for UDLM training. Full size table Training settings of downstream VSR models The training settings of the downstream VSR models are summarized in Table  14 . For fair comparison, all pseudo-paired data generated by different degradation learning methods are used to train the downstream VSR models under the same configuration. Table 14 Training settings of downstream VSR models. Full size table Real clinical dataset statistics The statistics of the real clinical endoscopic dataset used in “Performance evaluation in real-world endoscopic scenarios” section are shown in Table  15 . Table 15 Statistics of the real clinical endoscopic dataset used in “Performance evaluation in real-world endoscopic scenarios” section. Full size table t-SNE visualization settings The detailed settings of the t-SNE visualization experiment in real endoscopic scenarios are summarized in Table  16 . Table 16 Settings of the t-SNE visualization experiment. Full size table Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Xiong, J., Jiang, Z. & Qi, L. Unsupervised degradation learning model for endoscopic video super-resolution.
 Sci Rep (2026). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-65714-y Download citation Received : 09 June 2026 Accepted : 03 August 2026 Published : 17 August 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-65714-y Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Endoscopic video super-resolution Unsupervised learning Degradation modeling 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 

 
 



 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 




 
 
 
 Explore content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research articles
 
 
 
 
 
 News & Comment
 
 
 
 
 
 Collections
 
 
 
 
 
 Subjects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Follow us on Facebook
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Follow us on X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sign up for alerts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RSS feed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 About the journal 
 
 
 
 
 About Scientific Reports
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact
 
 
 
 
 
 Editors
 
 
 
 
 
 Journal policies
 
 
 
 
 
 Guide to referees
 
 
 
 
 
 Calls for Papers
 
 
 
 
 
 Editor's Choice
 
 
 
 
 
 Journal highlights
 
 
 
 
 
 Open Access Fees and Funding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 
 
 For authors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Language editing services
 
 
 
 
 
 Open access funding 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 Search 
 
 Search articles by subject, keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Show results from 
 
 
 
 All journals 
 This journal 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 Advanced search
 
 

 Quick links 
 
 Explore articles by subject 
 Find a job 
 Guide to authors 
 Editorial policies 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Scientific Reports
 
 ( Sci Rep )
 
 
 
 
 ISSN 2045-2322 (online)
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 nature.com footer links 
 
 
 
 About Nature Portfolio 
 
 About us 
 Press releases 
 Press office 
 Contact us 
 
 

 
 Discover content 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 Articles by subject 
 protocols.io 
 Nature Index 
 
 Nature Books 
 
 
 

 
 Publishing policies 
 
 Nature portfolio policies 
 Open access 
 
 

 
 Author & Researcher services 
 
 Reprints & permissions 
 Research data 
 Language editing 
 Scientific editing 
 Nature Masterclasses 
 Research Solutions 
 
 

 
 Libraries & institutions 
 
 Librarian service & tools 
 Librarian portal 
 Open research 
 Recommend to library 
 
 

 
 Advertising & partnerships 
 
 Advertising 
 Partnerships & Services 
 Media kits 
 
 Branded
 content 
 
 

 
 Professional development 
 
 Nature Awards 
 Nature Careers 
 Nature 
 Conferences 
 
 

 
 Regional websites 
 
 Nature Africa 
 Nature China 
 Nature India 
 Nature Japan 
 Nature Middle East 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Privacy
 Policy 
 Use
 of cookies 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies
 
 
 Legal
 notice 
 Accessibility
 statement 
 Terms & Conditions 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 © 2026 Springer Nature Limited 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 



 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 Close banner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Close 
 
 


 

 
 
 
 Sign up for the Nature Briefing: AI and Robotics newsletter — what matters in AI and robotics research, free to your inbox weekly. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 Email address 

 
 
 
 
 Sign up 
 

 
 
 I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy . 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 Close banner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Close 
 
 


 
 Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. 
 Sign up for Nature Briefing: AI and Robotics
 
 

 

 






 
 